---
date: '2017-02-13'
layout: post
authors:
    - biney
published: false
title: 'Social Critique and Data Activism in the Digital Humanities'
---
The subject-matter and discussion within the digital humanities (DH) is very democratizing and multifaceted. But it also creates several different questions on how studying DH can generate social critique, activism, or be socially transformative in general. Though given Lib/Lab was my first introduction to DH and the heightened extent of analysis that takes place in the field, I felt a little overwhelmed by just how much complexity there was in discussing and gauging the epistemological value of a printed book as opposed to a digitized pdf document. Even with that discussion, I wondered if that could be used for critique or thought outside of the humanities, outside of the archival, and into other areas. 

It’s true that conversations about pdf documents may not strike one as transformative. They aren’t, however, totally in left field. Langdon Winner’s “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” argues for a theory of technological politics, a change in how we evaluate technology. Most importantly, he suggests that we pay attention to the characteristics of technical objects and the meaning of these characteristics, in conjunction with the social interplay from which they’re created (22). This type of analysis takes more into account the structure of a piece of technology and the human interaction with it. Winner provides several examples particularly of agricultural and labor-based technologies, showcasing the unintentional political consequences of such through his analysis. Directing commentary towards anarchists, he acknowledges that the typical factory or labor-based system inherently enforces despotism which implies that social revolution against capitalism requires a technical and industrial revolution as well. Winner’s work was one of the most deeply inspiring works to me that I read during Lib/Lab with regards to cultural transformation. Here is a useful critique on how we think about technology and the political agendas that we can instill into it.

One of the most relevant technical objects to be thinking about is data. Technology takes many forms, but data has served as an important unit for storing information. It’s an important starting point for how DH can maintain open-source and democratic values. Lisa Gitelman’s collection of essays *Raw Data Is an Oxymoron* delves deeper in analyzing data. The title is actually a refutation against the concept of “raw data,” unprocessed and truly objective data. Gitelman argues that “all data has to be generated (and need to be) imagined as data to exist and function as such,” which entails a subjective and interpretive base that is based on the thoughts of individuals, disciplines, and other collectives (5). The final paper goes in-depth regarding how deeply we support each other using data, and suggests that acquiring more data isn’t necessarily going to help. Rather, a nuanced and hermeneutic approach that is able to recognize the forms that data can take upon these different collectives is more beneficial (171).

Both of these analyses inspire ways of thinking about technology that are important in creating a more inclusive DH that centers around social and cultural transformation. Careful technological critiques such as Winner’s and Gitelman’s support a holistic way of thinking about how technical objects can impact communities. To me, this calls for a sort of “database activism.” My Lib/Lab experience alone suggested this, given that many projects seemed centered around the creation of databases for marginalized groups.

Databases are an important part of DH in general, given that they make way for archiving that can be controlled by a smooth computer interface. By the end of Lib/Lab, I found myself researching more about database activism. I found out about The Digital Archives and Marginalized Communities project (DAMC). This Canadian research collaboration uses participatory information systems supported by local communities to document violence against indigenous women, sex work, and topics of colonialism. In its framework, they define an activist archive:

>An activist archives includes: a commitment to social justice that privileges marginalized perspectives and users; the building of collections focusing on under-represented and marginalized perspectives; and the privileging of particular community interests such that it is developed collaboratively (Lile, 2012).

DAMC sets an important standard for digital archives given that it is proposing projects that are directly centered around marginalized groups. The DAMC also stayed true to its collaborative nature, contacting different communities not only for information but also for suggestions on how to build an interface for their database. This makes a truly participatory database that is not only connected to marginalized communities, but is also more suitable for its users.

There are many more criticisms and aspects of how DH is being used (or isn’t being used) for social critique. Regardless, my Lib/Lab experience was able to show me an interesting amount of utility in the field for activism and social change, challenging the way I think critically about technology. Though given my background in Computer Science and Education, in many ways I still feel as though I am personally at the tip of the iceberg with regards to archival and database creation. But the DH functions as an interdisciplinary space where I can put these skills to use towards social change.